- Everything is the same.
And yet. everything looks smaller.
Unless it was I who grew up.
Yet how long has it been?
2 ½ years ?
- Is it for today
or for tomorrow?
- It is my favorite.
- Grouille.
- Let me go. I'm concentrating.
Shit.
Still plucked.
You are too incompetent.
Come on. we're gonna be late.
Shout
Keep it. your marble.
But stop crying.
Come on hurry up.
We are late.
- I'm not whining.
- That's it. you're not.
It is not just because of its
technological superiority.
That Hitler's army is
advancing rapidly.
- Excuse me
for the delay.
- You'll see me after class.
It is above all thanks to the
morale of the German people.
Who believe that their
destiny is to lead Europe.
It's not since yesterday.
Already under Charles...
Zerati!
Bring me this paper.
Come on. boy.
"I hold my mistresses.
even those of others."
Very funny.
But full of mistakes.
Did you write that?
- Bah. ..
- He is stupid enough
to pass it on.
but not clever enough
to write it. sir.
- Silence.
- You will copy me
50 times the motto of the Maréchal.
- And do not forget the "S" after "celles".
Come on. Zerati.
In your seat.
- Here!
Do you want another one?
I got you.
Right in the buttocks.
- Take this !
- You'll see.
- Get your guard up.
- You. you gonna stick one?
You're dreaming. the mosquito.
- Look. I have an idea.
- Because he had a
choice. perhaps?
- Haircut?
"Albert!
Take care of Monsieur.
- Hello.
What can I do for you ?
- They did not see anything.
- Cut the hair.
- With pleasure.
You're welcome.
Go on.
We'll take your coats.
The nape well clear?
- Please. And the stripe
on the left for my colleague.
- No problem.
- He does not speak French well.
He understands a bit.
Isn't it?
- Yes.
- But you speak
French very well.
- Not really. But I'd like
to improve. you know.
- Just a matter of time.
- I'll be back.
- See you.
Mr. Levy...
Mr. Léviyard.
- It's okay.
- It's for the house. Mr Léviyard.
Are they yours.
the two little boys?
- Yes.
The olders ones too.
These little thugs are always
ready to make the 400 shots.
- Ah. the war...
Terrible business. isn't it?
- It depends for whom.
It's because of the Jews.
- Here. Very clear.
Satisfied?
Thank you.
It went well ?
- Yes. Very good.
- Know. gentlemen.
that here. in this room.
everybody is Jewish.
- Oh. I almost had it.
Come on. in your bed.
- In bed. children.
We stop acting like idiots.
You let go of your brother.
- Go to bed.
- That's it. "jawohl". (yes)
You want to act like your brother.
Calm down. darling.
Dad told me what you did.
I forbid you to do that again.
Okay ?
They do not laugh.
the Germans.
- Ja! (yes)
- Sehr gut! (very good)
- Did you laugh?
- Yes.
You blow your nose.
- Yes. You're too strong. Dad.
- It's not a matter of strength.
- You answered them.
Maybe soon you can't
do it anymore.
- Perhaps. But in the meantime. we
are "worthy. upright and proud".
As your grandfather used to say.
- Papi Jacob.
- In bed !
Haven't you passed the age
of these nonsense?
- No.
- Well. me neither.
- Stop. There's school tomorrow.
Stop!
- But you're crazy?
- Come on. Come.
- If mom sees you
smoking. we're in shit.
- Why do you say "on"?
- "The Jewish star has 6 points.
"The dimensions of a hand
palm and outlines in black.
"It is in yellow fabric with. in
black. the inscription 'Jew'.
"It should be
"on the left side of the
chest. sewn on the garment."
- Listen. Mom.
"Penal provisions:
Offenses will be punished
"Imprisonment and fines.
"Measures such as internment
in the Jewish camp
"Added or substituted."
We can't do anything anymore.
We can't go out anymore.
- We don't have to stay here.
like that. without reacting.
- We'll see with daddy.
- It's like a medal.
- They mark us. like
in the Middle Ages.
- Shut up. Henri. That's enough.
- Mother. listen to me.
Albert and I made our decision.
We'll leave tomorrow.
- Where ? You're not gonna leave like that.
- Are they avenging themselves because they
have been annoyed in the salon?"
- No I think not.
Take this off your head.
- He's a Jew too.
- Right away.
- He is Jewish...
You don't have to frequent it.
- Why are you looking at me ?
- I didn't know you were Jewish.
- So what ?
What's the difference?
- Everything.
- Like what ?
- That means you're a Youpin.
Laughs
- A Youpin.
- It is you who have crucified
the little Jesus.
- That's it. it was I
who crucified him.
asshole.
- Asshole yourself.
- He will deny it.
with his Jewish blood.
- What's wrong with my blood?
Is it not the same as yesterday?
- It's because of the Jews
that the Germans are here.
- Take that back.
- In your dreams.
That's what you deserve.
- Well mosquitoes.
we want to fight?
Me. I like to slap.
- Another Youpin
who causes problems?
- Mosquito !
- Come on!
In a row!
Come back !
I will see you.
You. in my office.
- I hit him with my right.
- Not really. no.
I can defend myself.
- Wait. the Joffo!
So. is it better?
- Bof
- Show me
Your star.
Here. I exchange it against
my bag of marbles.
- What are you talking about ?
- Your star. I exchange it
Against my bag of marbles.
- Are you sure. Zerati?
- Yes. I told you.
I like it. your star.
Look. there's plenty of it.
- Good. Okay.
But I warn you. be careful.
It's not just a star.
It is also a target.
- Do not worry. Thank you.
See you tomorrow.
- See you tomorrow.
Hey ! Go ahead. give back.
- You made a great deal.
Bustles. We're gonna
get banged up again.
- Good morning. 'pa.
- Hurry up. maman is
waiting for you.
- Mom ! Today I
have no homework.
- Sit down. kids.
Come on. eat. It's going to be cold.
- There is a problem ?
- I will tell you a story
Which happened to
papi Jacob and me.
A long time ago. in
Russia. in the village.
There were riots
against the Jews.
It was called "the pogroms".
It was getting very hard to stay.
My father came to talk to me.
He told me that I had
to leave. alone.
To save my life.
And that's what I did.
And today...
- Is it our turn?
- Yes.
- And when?
- Tonight.
- Henri and Albert
left in the free zone.
They will be waiting for you
in Nice. at a friend's house.
- Why don't you come?
- It's too dangerous.
We would be spotted.
It's better to separate.
No one will be suspicious
of two little boys.
- And you ?
- We'll leave tomorrow.
Time to close everything.
Next week.
We'll all be in Nice.
So. look.
You are going to pass
In free zone by Hagetmau.
This is the safest route.
- There you will find a
ferryman. in a restaurant
The blue shutters. Beware.
there are many scammers.
- This is a list
With the stations.
the tickets.
Points of passage. appointments.
- Learn it by heart.
No one should see you
with these sheets. Okay ?
- I'll put it in your bag.
- That's 200.000 francs.
For train and coaches.
You will leave Austerlitz railway
station. direction Irun.
- It's marked.
Give me that.
- Most important:
You will swear to me
that you will never say
To anyone that you are Jewish.
Under any circumstances.
We must be proud of who we are.
But today. it is too dangerous.
And it's not cowardice.
- I swear.
- Promise.
- Jo.
Are you Jewish?
- No.
- Are you a Jew?
- Never answer
When someone talks to
you in Yiddish.
Tell me you're a Jew.
I know you're a Jew.
Tell me the truth.
I know you're Jewish!
Are you Jewish?
- No.
- Yes. you're Jewish.
- No !
- I know you're a Jew!
- No. I'm not Jewish!
- Excuse me. Jojo.
Sorry.
Better take a slap that hurts
Than losing life for
fear of taking one.
Do you understand. my Jojo?
- I'm not a Jew.
- Come on.
- Come on. Dress up. darling.
Come here.
Come.
- Come on.
- I love you.
Lets' go.
- No nonsense. eh?
- Hey.
Do not worry. I'll buy
you a ton of logs.
- That is true ?
- You're dreaming. ducon.
Come on. come on.
- It will be fine.
* -Train direction Dax.
imminent departure.
Please move away from
the edge of the dock.
- There is no room left.
The small...
Let the little ones go up.
It's over.
- Excuse me.
Sorry. Thank you.
Sorry.
- Sorry.
- Excuse me.
Can we sit down?
- Of course.
- Excuse me.
Are they also fleeing?
- How would I know?
- I dunno.
- We'll get to Dax.
That's where we go down.
- We're gone.
Our first night without the parents.
What are we fleeing from exactly?
- What is happening ?
- Jo. Jo. wake up.
We have a problem.
- Honey. hurry up.
- What is happening ?
Where are they going. all?
- I dunno.
Many have jumped
Before we stop.
- Come.
- Psst.
- We do not have our papers.
- If you seem to be afraid.
they'll find out.
Eat that.
- Follow us.
Follow us.
- Stay calm.
- Your papers.
- Papers.
- I don`t understand german.
- Is there a problem. sir?"
- Papers.
Go
- Thank you.
Papers.
- Yes.
I have lost a lot of
weight. but it is me.
"Gott mit uns."
God is with you.
It's good.
With us all. by the way.
Hey. kids?
The children are with me.
- Good. Thank you.
("We're going. we're going.")
- You come with us.
- There must be a mistake!
Let me go.
No. I do not want to follow you.
- What are they gonna do to her?
- Nothing. take care of you.
Hurry. you go
miss the bus.
- One moment please.
"Thank you. Monsieur le Cure.
To have lied for us.
- I did not lie. All the children
of the world are my children.
That's all. Go.
Hurry up.
Hey. psst.
You do not trust anyone. Okay ?
And smile a little.
You will not have apples
every day.
Good luck.
- Come on. you follow me. Let's go.
- We're following them.
- I still have a place at the bottom.
Follow me.
- Come on. come on.
- Did you see ?
Lots of people in
the restaurant.
- Did you see ? They have to
look for a ferryman. too.
The best way
To get caught is to stay here.
- Looking for a ferryman?
- No. it's okay.
- The ferryman comes to look
for people here from 8 am.
It's Bronchet.
It takes 10000 francs per person.
- 20000 francs!
- Eh yes.
With me. it would be cheaper. but
you are not looking for a ferryman.
- How much do you take?
Just to find out.
- Let's say...
1000 per head of pipe.
And without negotiation.
- And with negotiation?
- See you.
- We got them.
- Well. here!
Good. Give me
Half now
And the other when we arrive.
Bargain.
Good.
I will continue my deliveries.
titillate a little the roach.
And we find ourselves
there. at nightfall.
- We're not leaving now?
- Oh no.
This is too dangerous.
See you.
My name is Raymond.
- Hi. Raymond. Me. it's Jo.
It's still nice. isn't it?
- We've just lost 1000 francs.
- You're joking ? We have
just saved 18.000.
- We're better
than at Clignancourt.
- Yes it's sure.
I'll go pee.
- Yes.
Come on. come on.
Little one. Come here.
Watch out. The Boches!
I got you.
- Shit.
- Your faucet is
cut. 'little boy'.
"Jew. you are."
- You're stupid.
- You pissed on it.
Come on. come on. Come here.
No. you're not wiping me.
He sighs.
"It's almost dark."
What the hell is he doing?
There's no one here.
- He went to tickle the roach.
- And what does it mean?
It looks disgusting.
- I do not know. but
it's a long time.
We got ourselves by Raymond.
Papa had warned us.
Quickly. let's hang out.
Do not move.
Bend down.
- Look.
They look everywhere.
We'll never make it.
I want to see Dad and Mom.
- Calm down.
This is not the time to chill.
We wait a little longer.
- Damn it.
"Then the Parigots?" What the hell?
Come on.
Go.
Come on. little one.
Come on.
Warning.
- Stand up.
- Hey ! Psst. This way.
It is Father Bronchet
Who got caught.
It had to happen.
It passes through 12.
They make too much noise.
- Please.
Please.
We're lost.
Come. Come.
Come.
My wife and mother.
Our ferryman has abandoned us.
Help us.
- It's 1000 F per head.
The little.
it's free.
But let him not be heard.
- Very good.
Thank you sir.
- "Sir"?
He's funny.
Come on. it's good. We pass.
Go.
You see the barn?
It is open.
The farmer knows.
Come in. You will sleep on the straw.
- Thank you.
Thank you.
- We're in the free zone. over there?
- "In the free zone"?
You've been there for 10 minutes.
- Was it so easy?
- You're disappointed?
I told you.
With me. no danger. no Boches.
In the free zone. one
is free of what.
Exactly?
- Sleep.
- Are we free to be Jews?
- We're free to sleep.
-20 KILOMETERS ON FOOT
20 KILOMETERS ON FOOT
WEARS YOUR SHOES
21 KILOMETERS ON FOOT
IT WEARS IT WEARS
IT WEARS YOUR SHOES
22 KILOMETERS ON FOOT
IT WEARS IT WEARS
IT WEARS YOUR SHOES
- 23 kilometers on foot...
- You're limping?
- No it's nothing.
- You're in pain.
- It's nothing.
- Do not shit. show.
Take a seat.
Shit.
You can not walk with that any more.
It is not worth insisting.
Come on. come on.
Take your bag.
I'll take you on my back.
Go.
You know you're stinking?
- You stink of the ass.
But thanks anyway.
- That's normal. you're
my little brother.
I would carry you to the end
of the world. if need be.
Go on. get off. you're too heavy.
-"Till the end of the world" ?
- You are getting on my nerves.
- Are we lazy?
- No.
My brother is too tired.
- Come on. come on.
- Go ahead. go up.
Here we go.
It's Adolf.
- What are you going to do with it?
- We're gonna bleed him. With his
blood. we will make pudding and bacon.
And of course meat.
Go back. Adolf.
That's her ass.
You do not believe
They're just going
to bother us. right?
- Adolf. kaputt!
- Maurice and I changed our path
To avoid the highways.
It was too good to be like
that. to travel freely
As had never been the case.
We ended up forgetting that we
were running away from something.
There were no
parents. no school.
And above all. no one
to tell us what to do.
- Warning. the pitchounet.
It's not for the girls.
- We meet all sorts
of people on a trip.
Some more fun than others.
But everyone was afraid.
It could be seen in their eyes.
Even though everyone
was pretending.
Look at her.
Wow.
- I can not believe.
- What is she blue.
- Look.
We finally arrived.
- Kid. you're losing your jacket!
- Thank you sir.
- And the picture?
Come on. I'm not gonna bite you.
Just bitch you.
- They're more relaxed
than the Germans.
Come on. come on.
We'll see the frogs.
- Turnips or Jerusalem artichokes?
- Jo.
- The beautiful fish!
- Hello. Can I help you ?
- The salon
Of M. Levin's the hairdresser. please.
- It's right there.
- Hello.
- The children! Great.
- Albert!
Albert!
- Look.
- It seems that happiness
passes faster than sadness.
We were all together.
The rest did not exist.
- He still needs
His dad and his mother.
- Especially his dad.
- You're gonna be cold.
Okay darling ?
Never again do you leave me like that.
- Never again. Promised.
Never again.
- Never again.
- I was afraid.
- We too were afraid.
When you have children.
you will understand.
- I'm so proud of you. baby.
So proud.
I will always be
there in your heart.
Always.
She shouts.
- You are crazy !
Go. Watch out.
Watch out.
No.
No no no.
No no. No !
- Oh shit.
- Help me instead of laughing.
- I have better things to do.
What shall we do now?
- Let's go to the beach.
- That's all ?
- The other one has fallen.
- And the other ?
- Fallen. If you do not understand.
Forget the trade.
Tomorrow tomatoes.
- Impossible.
- And why ?
- On Monday. the Italian soldiers
give me some olive oil.
That I exchange for soap.
Against sugar. then
flour. then cigarettes.
Find tomatoes for the week.
it breaks my organization.
- I understand nothing.
- If you do not understand.
Forget the trade.
- And 5. What are you going
to do with all this money?
- I got my idea.
- Ciao.
- Tell Albert to free your neck.
- Jo will eventually
buy the Excelsior.
- You were still at the market?
- Yes.
- And school ?
- It's Thursday. Dad.
- You're not letting go of school.
- I'm not letting go of school.
- It's not possible.
- Stop talking Yiddish.
Do not stop repeating it.
- Relax. Roman.
Enjoy the beautiful sun.
- The war is not over.
You never know.
- You see everything in black.
- I see everything in black.
- I said nothing.
- He did not say anything.
- I am wary.
They tell dirty stories.
- We risk nothing.
- The Italians are soldiers.
Not assassins.
Tell him. Marcello.
- We do not kill
children and women.
- You do not kill women.
you break their hearts.
- I love the charm of the French
With their stern air.
- Belote. rebelote and ten de der.
What does one say?
- Well done. Dad.
Orders in Italian
- What's the matter ?
- Mussolini was arrested.
In Rome. it is chaos.
- What's going to happen ?
- We're going back to Italy tomorrow.
It's over. the holidays.
- Does that mean
the war is over?
- No. That means the
Germans are coming.
Don't tell mom.
Do not spoil her surprise.
- Okay.
- My cake.
- Take the cake off. That's enough.
But what is this ?
It's for me ?
- Yes.
- What is that. then?
But you're crazy...
You should not.
- It's not me.
it's the boys.
- It's you ? Jo.
- This is not for you.
It's for me.
I miss so much to hear you play.
- But I don't know anymore. darling.
- Of course you know.
Go.
- Your father gave
me my first violin.
I played.
And you recited poems.
- But what poems?
- Poems of love. Hey?
- Poems of love.
- Here.
- We want to hear you.
- Oh no.
- Yes. yes. yes.
- Yes Yes.
- A.
- I do not remember.
I want to hear
your mum.
Go ahead. darling.
Someone's knocking at the door.
- Police ! Open it!
(-Go to hide. children.)
Do not open.
- Mrs. Joffo? We have a
summons for Henri and Albert.
- I'm not Mrs. Joffo.
- We're not at 6. rue Pairolière?
- I beg you. think.
- We do not have a choice.
- I'm staying.
- Stop.
- I am fed up with all that.
- Hide yourself.
Think of the children.
- It's the police!
- Go ahead. go.
- Open it! It's the police!
We heard you.
- I 'm coming.
- What are you doing ?
- Yes ?
- Henri and Albert Joffo
Live here?
- Yes.
But they are not there.
- Here is their convocation for the
CLS. the Compulsory Labor Service.
They are expected
tomorrow at this address.
- Very good.
I will give it to them. Good night.
- Wait.
It was you who played
violin ?
- Not at all.
I was napping.
- He was taking a rest.
Do you laugh at us?
- No.
- You are alone ?
- Yes. well. I do not know.
I was sleeping.
- Show us your papers.
Hurry up.
- Let's go. Let's go.
- Sir
- Was it Jewish music?
- "Jewish"?
- Yes. Jewish. Yes or no ?
- I dunno.
- A problem. darling?
Hello.
- Sir wonders how I can
sleep while you play
violin.
- The violin.
it's you ?
- Yes. You see.
You do not like music?
- No. He doesn't like
the Jewish music.
- Okay.
But I am Russian.
And I am very proud.
And my maiden name is Markoff.
I am a descendant of the
Imperial Romanov family.
It's insulting to
say I'm playing
Jewish music.
- Yes Yes.
You pass the CLS papers
to Henri and Albert.
- It will be done.
- Have a good day.
- Thank you.
- Mrs.
- We gotta get out of here.
- One two. One two. One two.
One two. One two.
- There's plenty to do.
- Take your brother's.
It's you. Chief. now.
- You promised that we
wouldn't be separated anymore. Liars!
- Calm down.
We can't do anything about it. it's like that.
If we could. we would stay with
you. but we have no choice.
- I don't want us to separate.
I want to go back to Paris.
- For us too.
it's difficult.
- I do not want to stay here.
I want to be with you.
- That's enough.
Take hold of you. If we all start
crying. it will be useless.
We can not stay together.
It's too dangerous.
You have to look ahead.
now. and not turn around.
We must go now.
We will meet soon.
- Come on. come on.
Come.
- Come on.
- It's a collabos camp here?
- It is a government
camp for minors.
So he is a Petainist.
Do not worry.
Most of the people here
are not really Catholic.
And you will say like them.
You are Catholic?
- Of course sir.
- Yes.
- You will see for
yourself who you trust.
It's pretty obvious.
Gérard will give you
a tour of the camp.
- Follow me. toads.
Waking up at 6 o'clock.
Hey ! Small gift.
- What's that for?
- For your ears.
Go up to the dormitory.
- Here we must be wary.
Never say that you are Jewish.
- We're not Jewish.
- I thought.
We're not. either.
You did not understand ?
There are no Jews here.
"Schmock."
- Do not worry.
We are among us.
Watch out for Gerard and
his gang.
He's a real cunt.
- I understood.
- Clear.
- And him ?
- Him ? It's Angel.
He comes from Algeria.
- Are you talking about me. or I'm dreaming?
Hi. the new ones.
- You come from Africa?
- He thinks I come from the jungle.
with the elephants. I am from Algiers.
- And why are you here?
- Actually. you see...
I was at my brother's in Paris.
And during this time the
English landed in Algeria.
I'm stuck in France.
And as my brother met a
chick. he dropped me here.
- Your parents
Must be missed.
- Not at all.
My father is always behind
me and calls me a bourricot.
I was fed up.
All right. chicken.
- Follow me.
We raise our heads.
One two. One two.
One two.
- I tell you. the Boches
are everywhere.
They need their quota of
Jews to take to Germany.
In Nice. it is panic.
We're better here.
- Why ? Are you Jewish?
- Me ? No. Why? You. yes?
- No.
- I am.
I'm out of here.
My word. what trunks!
It's me. the best.
- Attention !
- What happened ?
- Is he sick. or what?
We almost fell on it.
- Shit.
With the mud. it does not slow down.
And the steering wheel is right.
You will eat puree.
- Puree. you!
Here!
- Come on. all on him.
- Come on.
- Puree. you yourself.
Just go.
Stopped. Here. take it.
- No !
Bring it back!
- This way. Come on. we're hurrying.
Come on!
- What's the matter ?
- The new one says that the
Chleuhs seek the Jews.
They will eventually arrive here.
- So what ?
We're Catholic. aren't we?
- Yes
Joseph Joffo. resident of Clignancourt.
In the Jewish quarter.
They just have to watch
you go to the tap to confirm.
-"the tap" ?
I'm not a kid anymore.
- What do you call that?
- Bah... The "zboub".
- "The 'zboub'."
Who told you that ?
- It's Angel.
- the Algerian.
- We just have to say
we're from here. too.
From Algiers?
- Well yeah. The same
story he told.
- The trip.
The voyage and everything.
- Yes. It's a good idea.
They will not be able to check.
You're not too stupid. ultimately.
- Hey. Joffos! We move our ass!
- The Algerian.
Show us what you
have in your belly.
Next!
Whistle blows
- If we tell that.
we live where?
-10. rue Jean-Jaurès.
- Why ?
- Because there's always
a Jean-Jaures street."
We keep the rest:
The house. the living room.
Dad is a hairdresser.
Mom plays the violin.
We will not be mistaken.
- Come on.
- You're not too
stupid. either.
- Come on. you follow.
We accelerate!
Come on!
- Ouch!
- We will try.
- Where are you going to
school. 'little boy'?"
- Rue Jean-Jaurès. A little lower...
"The name of your mother?"
- Anne Marie.
"And your father?"
- Romain.
- It's good.
Come on. let's go.
- I miss them.
- Me too.
- It's not normal.
not to have news.
- Maybe they're
suspicious of the phone.
- I want to see them.
- We do not know
where they are.
- I do not care.
- We're accelerating a bit here.
- Guys. tell me. you
have family in Nice?
- No. We go for a walk.
- Walk around?
Are you going to the Promenade
des Anglais to see the girls?
- Yes that's it.
- What's he going to believe?
- There's no shame
in that. you know.
In the near future. they will look at you.
Beautiful as you are.
- Warning !
- That's good sensations!
Wow! Go on.
We're gonna look at the girls!
- WE WILL WATCH THE GIRLS!
WE WILL SEE GIRLS!
- It's not the market.
- I got two minutes.
Wait for me. I come back.
Wait here.
Shh.
- It's not funny.
Come on. open.
- How do we do?
- You do not know
how to open a door. you?
Don't you get tired
of doing nothing?
- No.
- It's a while since he's gone.
What the hell is he doing?
- He said to wait.
- Go ahead. stay.
You're waiting for me.
Above all. you do not move.
I'll tell him we're going
to the market on foot.
- Jo.
It's okay?
- Okay okay.
- Stand up.
You promised not to move.
- I am sorry.
- Children! You say nothing.
- Slowly.
- Meyer. Martha.
- Hurry.
- Dreyfuss. Louis.
Goldman. Gabriel.
Epstein. Doris.
Goldman. Mordecai.
Abel. Adele.
Abou. Gabriel.
Saul. Levin.
- It's Levin.
It's Levin.
- You see
dad and mom ?
- Usually. I begin by asking
name. first name and religion.
But here I am lost.
Why all these false papers?
Are you Jewish?
- No.
- Are you not Jewish?
- So...
You are resistant.
- No.
- We are slaughtering everything resistant.
These are the orders.
In German
It is a resistant.
Unless you are Jewish.
- No.
Yes. I am Jewish.
Is that what you want to know?
I am Jewish.
And I'm tough. moreover.
I am Jewish and resistant.
Kill me.
It will not change anything.
It will not win the war.
You have already lost the war.
I am Jewish. resistant.
And I fuck you.
- Stop l
It is a resistant.
Next.
Name. first name. religion.
- David Cohen. Jew.
Jo cries.
- Next.
Name. first name. religion.
- Look. we have nothing
to do with it.
One is of new Harvests.
- Name. first name. religion.
- Maurice Joffo. Catholic.
We just went with Ferdinand for the races.
It is a mistake.
We have nothing to do with it.
- It is your brother ?
- Yes. it's my brother Jo.
- Jo... Like Joseph?
- Yes.
Mother is called Mary.
- I see.
So you're not Jewish?
- No. I told you.
- Stop! We are Algerians!
Catholic Algerians.
- We take back.
Are you Jewish?
- No.
- No !
Stop!
Let go of me.
To the medical examination!
- You say you are Catholic?
- Yes.
In Algeria. we do this
As a precaution.
It's because of the adhesions.
- Yes sir.
They cut the "zboub"
of everybody. The Algerians.
The Catholics. all.
- Even the Jews.
That. I do not know.
There are not really any Jews there.
I've never seen one.
My word.
- Sit down.
My name is Rozen.
Do you know what it means ?
- No.
That you are pink.
- No. I am a Jew.
So you can tell me. to me.
That you too are Jews.
- You are a Jew. but not us.
- We are Algerians.
That's why we have
the "zboub" cut.
So. Jewish or not. you
know what you have to do.
Wache!
It's surgical. not religious.
Go.
- Next.
- I will always
wonder why the doctor
Has saved us.
While every day he had
to condemn hundreds.
On the Rue Jean-Jaures. as
I have already told you.
- The name of the school?
- The primary school in Algiers.
- The Jean-Jaurès school. I think.
- That's all ?
- Well. yes. I think.
I did not make a mistake. but...
It's the school. what.
- Friends. in this school?
- Yeah. plenty.
Zerati. that's my best friend.
He is very strong at the marbles.
- Zerti...
- Zerati.
He is good with marbles.
- You play what. in school?
- A lot of things.
Perched cat. cut cat. prisoner.
with the balls...
Then there are many:
To the paw. to the package. to the tick.
The hole. the pyramid...
What did I do?
- Listen to me. little one.
I know
When someone is telling the truth or not.
And you. you lie.
And your baptism.
You did it where?
At the great church of Algiers.
I bet ?
- No. Here in Nice. at the Buffa.
Mom wanted to do it
with her family here.
- It's good. It must be
very easy to verify.
A 48-hour pass!
You have 2 days to get your
baptismal certificates.
If within 48 hours
You have not returned.
I send your little brother
into the next train.
It's understood ?
- I did not know what to say.
I do not know any
church in Algiers.
- If you see that you can
not do it. come back.
A living man is
better than two dead.
- Do not say that. I come
back with false papers.
- It's mission impossible.
Save yourself.
- Shut up.
I will be back.
Jo. Something wrong?
- I am tired.
It has been going on for a week.
I'm fed up with this bullshit.
I want it to stop.
- Listen to me.
When there is hope. nothing is let loose.
Hang on. Jo.
- Maurice Joffo!
- Listen to me.
I come again. You hear me ?
I come back for you.
Promised.
- Mom.
- No. leave me alone!
"Leave me alone!"
- Mom !
Dad...
- Jo.
Jo.
- Dad ?
- No. not really. Joseph.
- Dad. I told no one.
- Do not say anything. You have
been delirious. but you are saved.
Sulphonamides have been effective.
- Dr. Rozen?
- You are lucky.
Meningitis
Does not often forgive.
- And my brother ?
I have been there since when?
-2.  3  days. It does not matter.
You got away. that's the important thing.
- That way. I'll be in good
shape to get on the train."
- Listen to me carefully.
I'm the one who's going.
I'm the one who sets out for
the train with the others.
It's better that way.
You know. Joseph.
Sometimes in life. we do things
Which we are not
always very proud of.
Here.
You held her tight in
your fist. like that...
Throughout your delirium.
You seem to be holding on to it.
- That's all I have left from before.
- If you keep fighting.
keep your life tight
In your fist. like that.
you're gonna get out of it.
- What's the use of living?
It is a matter of chance.
It's stupid.
Stu...
It is unfair.
- Joseph...
Death did not want you twice.
That means you have a
good reason to live.
So do something about your life.
Be proud of it.
Come on. you owe me that.
Adieu. Joseph.
- These are fakes.
- Not at all. I assure you.
The Archbishop
Can testify.
These are genuine certificates.
- I do not believe you.
- Why ?
- I know
how to ecognize the truth.
And when I look at you.
You know what I see?
- The priest of Buffa
gave me 2 certificates.
I alerted Subinagui too.
They'll pick us up.
- And...
dad and mom ?
- The living room is closed.
- It is not serious.
We'll get out of here and
we'll find them one day.
- Why do you bother about them?
- They are Jewish.
I put my hand in the fire.
- It's obsession.
- If you want.
But that will not change anything.
They lie.
And you too.
- The Archbishop
Will not condemn
2 children on mere assumptions.
He will refer to Rome.
You do not want to
have the pontificate on your tail?
Especially now.
- We'll see that.
- All right.
The two brothers ! Go get
me tomatoes in the garden.
- I do not understand
why they keep us.
- Come.
You see that vegetable garden?
It's very easy to escape.
- There's more to that.
- Here. there?
- Really very easy.
- Maurice... look.
- You are the keeper of their
innocence. isn't it?"
- Did you see ?
- Yes.
- Let's go ?
- We're going. on three.
One...
Two...
Three. go.
- Attention.
A soldier.
It's a trap.
- Thank you.
(You saved our life.)
- Mr. Subinagui!
- Hello. children.
- Thank you. father.
You were brave.
- I only did my duty.
Go in peace. my children.
- Come on. We must not hang out here.
Jo.
- Farewell. father.
- Go. Go.
- You make a head of it.
- DAD !
- Where is mom ?
- Your mother is with her sister.
And your brothers. in Savoy.
I stayed to find you.
What is that ?
- Better a slap that hurts
rather than ever see you again.
Papa promised us we
would meet in Paris
Once the war was over.
But. for now. it was too
dangerous to stay together.
- Maurice?
Jo. Jo. wake up.
Your mom's on the phone.
- Hi Mom ?
It's me.
"My darling. are you okay?"
You have to leave right away.
Your father had the
same illness as you.
- Meningitis ?
- Worse than that.
- Hello?
- I understood that she was
talking about dad's arrest.
But I no longer had tears.
The rage had replaced them.
Again. we had to flee.
I can carry you. if you want.
- Rather die.
I'm the big brother.
I'm the one who carries.
- We had lost touch
with each other.
But it did not matter.
If Maurice and I
had arrived there.
Then dad even more.
Everything was going to be fine.
You had to believe it.
While waiting for the end
of the war. we found a job.
As mom told us to do.
Any job.
Maurice worked in the
local restaurant.
And I was a deliverer
for the bookseller:
- You see. Joseph.
And that you will not learn
at a public school.
Because the school has become
public. like a girl...
What characterizes a great
man is to have an ideal.
And there are not 36 things
to do. there is only one:
Europe.
And they are three. my dear
Joseph. to have made Europe:
Louis XIV.
Napoleon Bonaparte
and Philippe Pétain.
-"I keep my promises.
Even those of others."
- That's right.
Congratulations. my little Joseph.
My son.
Here. Bravo.
Watch.
You're doing a good job.
In the Militia.
- You'll see. it's just the beginning.
France to the French.
- Wait a bit.
You sleep under my roof. you
worked at my house for 6 months.
So you're part of the family.
Isn't it?
- Yes sir.
- Your parents must miss you.
Far from you. in Algeria.
- Yes a lot.
- As of today. you
will dine with us
And you will. as of Sunday. share
What is most dear to us:
The religious office.
You are not very assiduous
at Mass. It is time to educate
your Christian faith.
- Yes.
Thank you. Mr. Mancelier.
Newspaper!
La Gerbe !  The Dauphinois !
I'm everywhere !
I'm everywhere !  The  log.
Who wants the newspaper?
- Let's see. little one.
Oh no. thank you.
La Gerbe !  The Dauphinois !
I'm everywhere !
La Gerbe. The newspaper ?
The Dauphinois !  La Gerbe !
I'm everywhere !
Good morning. Ms. Loca.
Oh ! Sorry.
My brakes are not working.
- I take the  Gerbe.
- La Gerbe ?
- Yes.
- Thank you. Have a good day.
The newspaper of Vichy. M.
Julien ?
La Gerbe ?  I'm everywhere ?
- Rather die.
Keep it. your journal.
Still stupid. Mancelier?
- Always.
- Hello. Here. the newspapers.
- Hey. Jo!
Shh.
*The penguin clasps her in her arms.
The Penguin
Clasps her in her arms.
- What's this ?
- Encoded messages
for the Resistance.
* -The ghost is not talkative.
- Good. I go. Mancelier will yell.
By the way. how is she.
the girl of the collabo?
- Why do you want to know that ?
- Still in love with
your little Francoise?
What does it do...
5 months that you look at her?
You went to talk to her?
- I progress.
- And you. your entrance into the
Resistance. is progressing?"
- Do not start with that.
- They send you coded messages?
- Yes
"Francoise has hair on her legs."
- You're really guttering.
- The militia.
Maurice. hide everything.
You send the message.
Hold on.
- Lets' go.
- Its good.
- Give that to Mr.
Jean at the factory.
- Nobody moves.
You stay here.
- I'll take the floor.
- Search it all.
Show me.
What do you have in there?
What are you hiding from us?
Remove your hand.
What's this ?
Empty your pockets.
- Me ?
- Yes. yes. you.
I feel that you hide things.
With your cunt of marten.
Go away.
You're not dragging here anymore.
- So what ?
What are you doing here ?
By what right
You go home to people like that?
- Who is he ?
- The newspaper delivery man.
He wants to talk to Mr. Jean.
- What do you have to say to him?
- Paul. at the Hotel du Commerce.
gave me one thing for him.
- What did he look like. Paul?
- Pretty big. round glasses.
hair in this sense.
- Give me the message.
- I have to give it to Mr. Jean.
- It's me. Mr. Jean.
Go.
Come on. give.
- It's him. give it to him.
- Take over.
Follow me.
Close the door.
- There is water in the gas.
"The Chamois of the Alps jumps."
We've been waiting for that for a while.
Congratulations. little one. Well done.
Maryse will tell you if
we ever need you again.
Come on.
- Attention. Francoise. it's hot.
Yes!
Someone's knocking at the door.
Yes !
- Hello. excuse me
for the delay.
- You lost yourself in the attic?
Shut the door. please.
- Yes excuse me.
- What are you doing here ?
- Well. Mr. Mancelier...
- You get out.
- Leave him alone.
It was dad who invited him.
- And here is the beast!
- Here.
Joseph. at the table.
Put yourself next to Raoul. over there.
- I raise my glass
to all mothers
And to all the women who
will wear in their bellies
the France of tomorrow.
Happy birthday. ladies.
- Thank you.
- "You are the inspirers of
our Christian civilization."
Who said that ?
- Marshal Petain. papa.
- Exactly.
How can we treat "sold" man
who glorified Mother's Day?
My God. help the
Marshal to resist.
- And Adolf Hitler.
If one had allied himself to him in
1936. with Franco and Mussolini.
England would not have fired
And Europe was ours.
Anyway.
- And we did not?
- Because our
government was rotten
By Jewish vermin.
- Hitler did a good job.
- There's no other way.
Be up to the challenge.
- In any case. we're going to
exterminate them. these rats.
They may hide in their holes.
they will all go through it.
-  In the meantime. help us to drink.
- My brother. he's a jerk.
He is anti-everything.
Anti-republican. anti-communist.
anti-capitalist...
- Antisemitic.
- That too. yes. more
than anything else.
- He thinks like your father.
- Well yeah.
They're the same. those two.
- I. too. think like my father.
- Who is your father?
You never talk about him.
- Well. that's my father.
- You are mysterious.
the two brothers.
True. one wonders what you hide.
That. "on"
- Me and the girlfriends.
- Francoise. Listen.
I have to tell you something.
I do not have the right
to say it. but I can
tell it to you.
Because I trust you.
- Are you sure you're okay?
- Yes.
- Well. go ahead. I'm listening to you.
- I am...
I am...
- Do not worry. I got it.
- Come on.
- Come quickly. Quick.
- Hurry up.
Go upstairs.
Hey. you.
The.
- It is my brother.
- Enjoue.
Fire.
Sobs
- Freedom.
Equality. Fra...
- Clear them.
- Fortunately they did not
take you. the Resistance.
You might be dead now.
Imagine telling the parents?
To Henry and Albert?
It's the English.
- No. it's the Americans.
You know what that means?
- We'll see them soon.
- Death to the Militia!
You will pay for all
those who have died.
To the death. the collaborators!
- Band of bastards!
You want to give France
back to England? Cretin!
The English are the historic enemy.
Not the Germans.
Species of imbeciles!
- What are we going to do ?
- It's Waterloo. we lost.
- Be careful.
Françoise. that cuts.
The little one. Ambroise.
must be protected.
You must take Françoise
to my sister's house.
- Your daughter. your mother. your sister!
I do not care !
- I know what it's like
to leave. you know.
Everyone in my family had
to leave at one time.
My father said. "Do not look
behind you when you walk.
"Otherwise we break our mouths."
- I'm sure you're
like your father.
- It's not true !
- Joseph! Joseph!
What's happening to her?
Misery...
- Paris is liberated!
Paris is liberated!
Hold. Paris is liberated.
Hold.
Paris is liberated!
Read the newspaper! Paris is liberated.
The newspaper ! Paris is liberated.
Paris is liberated! They left !
- They're gone. Jojo.
They left.
They're gone. it's over.
- Look. they're going to Paris.
Go get your brother.
- My dear fellow-citizens.
today is a big day.
We are finally free!
- Sleeping with the Germans!
Treacherous!
- Jo!
- Maurice!
- Do you believe it?
- No. It's finally over.
- Come. Cars go back to Paris.
- What?
- There's room for us.
Go get your things.
We're going back.
- No I can not.
Go yourself.
I'll meet you later.
- You're sure ?
- What would you do?
We're free. are we not?
- We're free. yes.
- Tell our parents I'm
coming and I love them.
- Are you going to cope. all by yourself?
- And you.
You're gonna get away without me?
- Come on. find her.
- Francoise!
Francoise!
No. Stop! Stop!
- Stop! Stop!
- Stop! He hid a Jew.
- What are you saying ?
- That is true.
That bastard would
never hide a Jew.
- I swear to you.
- And who then?
- Me.
I am Jewish.
I am Jewish!
I am Jewish ! I am Jewish!
- Did he know?"
- Of course he knew.
- Nevertheless. he is
a collaborator.
- He did it so he would
not be suspected.
We're embarking.
- Go to the hole.
waiting to judge.
And Marcelle. we'll
shave her head anyway.
- Thank you.
- Where is she. Francoise?
Francoise. wait!
Francoise!
Papa
Dad!
- Mom !
Mom. Jojo is back.
- Mom. it's me!
- Jojo!
Maurice. your brother is here!
- Dad.
Dad. do you remember?
You told me that when
a good man dies.
A star in the sky lights up.
and one had to keep hope.
Well. that's true.
You're here. papa. and
you'll always be.
In April 1944. Anna. Albert and Henri were arrested during their flight.
then interned in the Drancy camp.
Due to a lack of trains. they narrowly escaped deportation
The Red Cross liberated them shortly before the arrival
of the Americans. in August 1944.
The family was thus able to return to Paris.
Roman. deported in convoy No. 62 to Aushwitz in November 1943.
never returned.
In 1945. Joseph and Maurice took over their father's hairdressing salon
with their brothers. thus continuing the family tradition.
They still live in Paris. surrounded by their children and grandchildren.
Subtitles: Eclair Media